hi my name is adina
i'm from the institute of neuroscience
and medicine at the research center in
euleg
and i'm going to introduce you to the
software tool data today
here is what you will have learned at
the end of the session
you will know why it is useful to use
version control not only for your code
in manuscripts but also for all
other aspects of your research for
example data
you will get to know the yoda principles
for reproducible and
intuitively structured data analysis and
you will learn about data load
in particular the relevant commands to
consume and create so-called data data
sets
to version control files regardless of
their file size inside of them
link the various components of a data
analysis together
and run and rerun computationally
reproducible data analysis
this session will contain references to
tools that you've already learned about
in particular the version control
toolkit
and the concept of software containers
at the same time this session today will
lay the foundations for next week's
session on the execution and environment
manager ripperman now
what is datalat datalit is a command
line tool that assists with data
management and data publication
it builds on two version control tools
git which you already know about and get
annex
among its main features are version
control for arbitrarily large content
transport mechanisms for sharing and
obtaining data
and commands and concepts for
computationally reproducible data
analysis
you can see that my recording contains
the slides on the right hand side
and my computer's terminal on the left
if you want to you can not only listen
to my talk but also follow along to the
coding examples that i will be
demonstrating in my terminal
if you follow the link on the slide
right here
you can find the code that i'm executing
to copy and paste into your own terminal
and you will also find additional
explanations
and references you can see
in my terminal that i'm running datalit
version
to print my software version of datalit
you should make sure to have version
013.6 or higher installed if you're
coding along
and you should also make sure to have a
configured git identity so that git
knows your name and email address if you
have used git before then you will
likely
have done this already just for
completeness i've included it here in my
codecasts
okay in order to install datalet if you
haven't done so yet please go to
handbook.datalab.org and find
installation and configuration
instructions for your operating system
should you have questions or run into
problems you can get help
by opening an issue on the github
repositories of the handbook
or of datalite itself all right
whenever you use dataled then you will
do this in what is called
a dataset a set is simply a directory on
your computer that is managed by data
dataled and on first side a data led
data set really looks just like any
other directory on your computer
here for example you can see two
screenshots of the same data set
one in a file manager one in a term and
this may sound super familiar because
you experienced something similar
already with git repositories
it's just a directory where you point
the software to in order to have it
managed
and this isn't far off at all actually
because the data dataset is a git
repository
it just has more features and those
features can improve your science and
data analysis
further than git alone can now in
order to get a dataset you can either
create a new dataset from scratch
or transform an existing directory or
get repository into a dataset
or you can install a dataset from
somewhere else
you will see both options in this
session but in order to demonstrate the
first set of features of data sets i'm
starting with creating
a data set from scratch so let's take a
look at the basics
first i'm creating a new data set from
scratch and
i will use that to demonstrate some
basic functionality
in the narrative of a small toy data
analysis
i'm doing the creation with the datalit
create command
this command takes a name in this case
my analysis and it will create a new
directory under this name
and instruct datalet to manage it here
the command also has an additional
option the
c option which is used to configure
datasets
in a certain way at the time of creation
at this configuration
or a procedure as it is called
has the name yoda and this configuration
prepares a dataset
for data analysis with a bit of use for
structuring and
settings now if i list the directory
structure
inside of this newly created data set
with the unix tree command
you can see some of the things that this
procedure has done because the data set
isn't
empty but it has a code directory in
which you can place your scripts and it
has plenty of documentation files that
you can use to document your analysis
for others and your features itself
okay so one feature of datalit is
version control
and the first hint towards this is
um if you take a look into
uh the dataset and also list all of the
hidden files
you can see these hidden dot
files or dot directories and these
belong to the version control tools that
work in the background
now i will use a very simplistic example
to demonstrate how easy version control
is for this i will just start by
removing placeholders
in the readme files that are included in
this data set
and i'm doing this in my remote control
terminal
by just echoing an empty space inside of
them that's easier for
me but you can also just um use
an editor of your choice if you want to
now these two files were already managed
by datalite
there is a command called datalit status
that reports on the state of the data
set
with the change that i have just done i
have modified files that were already
under version control
and therefore in the datalit status
query these two files show
up as being modified i can also use git
tools for example git div
to find out more about the changes
between the current state and the last
saved version of this file
and you can see everything that has been
removed highlighted in red and
everything that has been added
highlighted in green if i decide now
that this is a worthwhile addition to
the data set i can record the current
data set state
using the data let save command this
command
will save all of the modifications in
the data set
in order to build a human readable
history
i'm also attaching a concise commit
message that summarizes my changes with
the
dash m which is short for dash dash
message option
and that was it saved
this is different than how you would use
git and you should note
that dataled save saves all of the
dataset modifications
so all untracked or modified files
this saving of everything is not always
desirable so now i'm going to show you
how to save specific modifications only
and for this i'm downloading a file into
the dataset in this case it's an xkcd
comic that i'm retrieving with the unix
command
we get the w get
but i'm also modifying one of the
readmes
by giving my project a description so
now i have two modifications in my data
set
here you can see them reported from
data led status um and they are
unrelated
it is not good practice to save
unrelated changes together so you should
separate them you should always work
under the assumption
that you may want to revert the change
that you have done and there's an
individual change so it should be
quite self-contained and not include
additional work that doesn't have
anything to do
with what you may want to reward so to
separate those two changes i'm saving
them individually
and with datalit i can do this by adding
a path to date
let's save first i'm saving the readme
and i'm again attaching a nice commit
message
and then after this is saved i can do
another save to save the remainder of
changes
and thus save the comic that i have
added to my dataset
cool and after these few changes i have
already built a small version history
of my data set and i can then
use tools like git lock because this
version history
is nothing but the git history to take a
look at it or interact with it
and i can even for example query
individual files on how they evolved
by for example just running
git log on a particular file and what
i'm seeing here
is this file's git history cool
so procedurally version control
is super easy with data led you can
modify the data set and then you can
save the changes with a
single command and if you only save
meaningful units of change and attach
helpful commit messages
then you can also grow a nice version
history of everything that has been done
and this version history is super useful
because it can become a complete
research lock
for you and others to find out what was
done
when by whom and how
importantly you can use data led to
version control
data of any size so not only readme
files but also neural imaging data
movies your music collection anything
and it is quite important to do this
because data changes just like code does
it changes because errors are fixed data
is extended file naming standards change
you
might be using a different subset of
data for a second rerun of your data
analysis there are many many reasons
but it is very important to capture what
happens to data
and also which versions of data are used
for
a data analysis because the underlying
data is fundamental to the results that
you obtain
and without knowing precisely which data
and analysis was run on it is very
difficult to
produce a scientific finding but by
version controlling also data
you have a history of what happened and
you can identify each version of this
history uniquely
but before i show you how to use dataled
for analysis and linking data and
precise versions
to code and results there are a few more
features that i want to demonstrate
the first is a sneak peek into
provenance capture
dr matone has already talked about
digital provenance in week five
it's an important part of fair data
management and it makes your life and
others lives
a lot easier now in a data set you're
already capturing some provenance for
example who did it change
and when but there's a command that
captures
um some more provenance namely the
origin of a file
and this command is called a datalet
download url
i'm going to show you how i use this
command right now
what i'm giving to this command is a url
in this case to another webcomic
a commit message and a file name um i'm
hiding this little file here by giving
it a file name that starts with a dot
because on unix like systems dot files
are hidden so i've placed
a little easter egg inside of my data
set so that people that can look at my
data analysis
will find something funny if i execute
this
command then dataled will download the
file from the url
it will save it under the file name and
with the provided commit message
and importantly register the origin of
this file in the background
and this is helpful in many ways at the
moment it is convenient
because it spares me a day to let save
but later i will
use the provenance that has been
registered in the background to
demonstrate a very important principle
of data latin
okay but first let me quickly summarize
what has happened
so far you can create a data data set
with datalit create
there are procedures such as yoda that
are useful and i will give you some
details on this soon
a dataset builds up a git history and
tools that can visualize this history
like tick or get lock can be used to
explore this history and interact with
it
data that's safe records the data set or
file state into history
this does version control with fewer
commands than git and you may find it
easier but you could also use git
commands in datalet datasets
in any case make sure to attach commit
messages that
summarize the change for future you and
others to have a nice human readable
data set history data let download urls
obtains web content and saves it
together with its origin
and finally data let's data supports the
current state of the data set
it is good practice to have what is
called a clean data set state
with no modifications or unchecked files
okay next i want to show you
how you can consume data sets a data set
can be created from scratch
but it can also be installed from a url
or path
for example someone could publish a data
set to a place like github
and you can clone it from there and
consuming data sets like this
is a wildly popular use case for datalit
because it provides you with streamlined
procedures for data access retrieval and
updating
for example let me go out of this
dataset that i have created
and install some neural imaging data
it's the same
that you can see in the slides in this
gif
what i'm installing here is the study
forest data set and i'm installing it
from a public github url
for this i'm using the data.clone
command which only takes
this url at the moment something
that is really peculiar here is how fast
this installation is
because this data set is the neural
imaging dataset that tracks many
gigabytes of files but the installation
took only a few seconds
and if i then take a look inside of this
data set
and list the file contents then i can
browse
through all of these files the
reason why it was so fast even though
there are so many files inside of them
is that most of the files in this
dataset don't contain
contain any content yet and this leads
to a really small size
so if i run the du disk usage command
then it reports that the overall size of
the data set is just a few megabytes
but with this data set i now have access
to all file contents that are inside of
this
on demand and i can retrieve file
contents
using another command that is called
date let get
here's how that looks like what i'm
doing here
is that i am specifying a path
um to the
nifty files across all runs of localizer
tasks for one subject in this data set
and when i execute this command then
data.get
will retrieve the file contents of all
of these files
now with this
with these with these concepts we don't
only have streamlined data download and
access
but what this allows me is to have
access to more data than my hard drive
has space
because if you would only consume public
data
that lives in data data sets you would
already be able to get more than 200
terabytes
of data in this fashion and you have
access to this data without
actually having to store it on your
computer
and by using datalit you can also
publish your own data in a way that
others can retrieve it like this
now what is also cool is that i can also
drop file contents to free up disk space
if i don't need them anymore
i'm doing this with the data drop
command and
here i'm dropping the contents of one of
those files that i've just retrieved
what this is useful for is that i can
keep a very small
sized link to the input data attached to
the results of my analysis to for
example enable recomputation
but don't use up much disk space with
this province so once i don't need data
anymore
i can just get rid of it without losing
access
however you can't drop all data and i
will demonstrate this in the first data
set we've created
in this data set there are two comics
and i've downloaded one straight from
the web
using wget and for the other one i used
data download url
the latter comic can be dropped safely
i'm showing you this right now the
reason for this
is that datalet registered the file's
origin to it
and it knows from where to re-obtain the
file again
i cannot drop the other comic that
easily
because there is no origin registered
and this results in a warning of
potential data loss that i would need to
overwrite if i would be sure that i want
to drop the file content here
okay the reason for this behavior and
the fact that some data doesn't have
file contents after cloning
is due to the fact that most data in
data sets is managed by the togil annex
i won't go into all of the details of
these technicalities there's a handbook
chapter on that
but i'll briefly highlight the practical
implications because it can be very
useful to know about them
so data and data sets is either stored
in git or in gitanics
cadance can unlike git track files of
any size
it can protect your files and it
provides means to transport your files
so that data becomes as easily
installable as software
but the files that are stored in cadence
behave differently than file start and
get
their content is not present right after
cloning and need to be retrieved
and even though i haven't showed you
this they are also right protected to
prevent accidental modifications so if
you want to work with them
they need to be unlocked first now
by default a data led save would annex
everything
because gitanix handles all file types
and sizes
very well but it is useful to store
small files
that frequently change such as code or
readme files and git because it makes it
easier to work with them
and there are many ways to configure
this and one of those ways
is for example procedures such as yoda
what
the yoda procedure does is configuring
the data set so that anything in the
code directory
and the placeholder markdown files will
be stored in git instead of get annex
and others readily modifiable
so in this data set that i've created
the readme files version with git and
the
comics they are annexed and thanks to
this yodel procedure
i don't need to care too much it
basically works out of the box for me
now the next feature that i want to
highlight is that datalit can link
any number of datasets together
we call this nesting because with this
feature
a dataset can include other datasets in
a hierarchical
order data set that contains another
data set just for terminology
is sometimes called a super data set and
the included data set is then called a
sub data set
but apart from the hierarchy level
there's no difference between them
this feature of nesting has two
advantages first it overcomes scaling
issues
some data sets that we work with
including abcd
become incredibly large and when they
exceed a few 100
000 files version control tools can
struggle and break
by nesting data sets and you will see a
concrete example later
you can overcome this and split a data
set into manageable pieces
but importantly you can apply data that
commands
recursively through data sets so even
though you have
many separate individual data sets if
they are linked together in a hierarchy
of data sets
this still feels like a single data set
the second thing is that nesting allows
you to link datasets as standalone
independently version controlled units
and thus build up research
from reusable and transparent modular
components
this modularization is a foundation of
the yoda principles that i will get to
shortly
but you can already in this graphic here
see its immediate advantage
this nested hierarchy of data sets
exposes the entire evolution of a
research object from raw data to process
data to analysis results and published
paper
and nesting makes each step and its
predecessors not only transparent
but also potentially reusable so that
for example the process data
can become an input to several analysis
not only to one
and when you share your paper or
analysis with others
they can retrace every step that has
been done in this hierarchy
at least those components that you share
with them and also build up on them
and likewise with these modules you can
make sure that only
let's say anonymized data is shared so
only
modules that you actually want to be
shared
you can in this example in this graphic
for example keep the raw data completely
private by just
restricting the access to this dataset
let me show you how to nest a dataset
i will do this in order to prepare my
data analysis
and i'm doing it by installing a dataset
that contains some input data on which i
will later
run a data analysis the command that i'm
using here is again
datalit clone but this time i'm using an
additional flag dashd
which is short for and
that needs to point to the root of the
my analysis data set
which will become subsequently the super
data set
in this hierarchy if i execute this it
will
download the input data from github
and if i now take a closer look into the
commit that this has created in my data
set
then you can see a couple of things that
are registered
inside of it for one you can see
the url where this dataset
lift came from and the
path in the current dataset and you can
also
see something that is called a
subproject commit
if we now take a look into the history
of the sub data set so if i
change directories inside of it and then
query the git log then
you can see that the subdata set has
preserved its standalone history even
though this is a really small history
and that its most recent commit
identifier
is actually the subproject commit that
is registered
as in the super data set
so this links the sub data set in
a precisely identified version state to
the super data set so that this data is
registered
in a precise version to the data
analysis that i will be conducting
and that's great because nesting now
registers
the origin and the location of a sub
data set
and also its version
now to quickly summarize everything
about consuming data
the command to install a data set is
dataletclone
and you can use that on its own with
just a url and an optional path
or with the dataset flag and the pointer
to a superdataset route to install it as
a sub dataset
datasets preserve their history and you
can get access to it if you clone it
if you install it as a sub dataset then
the superdataset records only the
version state
of the subdataset in the sub-data set
keeps its standalone history
after cloning only files that are kept
in git
and metadata about file availability of
annex data are present
the file content of annex data can be
retrieved on demand via data get
and if you don't need that file content
anymore it can be dropped
with the data let drop command
now before i continue with more datalet
basics i want to briefly talk about a
few concepts and rules for reproducible
data analysis
those rules are called yoda principles
and if you apply them
in your data data set then you can
create intuitively structured data
analysis
that are much easier to reproduce the
yoda
principles are guidelines on the
structure content and handling of data
analysis
they aren't limited to datalet but they
can be really easily adopted if you are
using dataled
with regard to the structure of data
sets you should keep analysis components
so data code software modular it's a
rule of thumb
whenever something is a standalone
entity and could be reused in another
context it should become
its own data set and the individual
components
should then be linked to each other via
a nesting
a data set for data analysis also needs
to be portable and self-contained
this means it should include everything
that is necessary for computations
and all components should be version
controlled
it also means that scripts and other
references
should only refer to content within the
dataset hierarchy
and only with relative paths this
ensures
that a data set can not only be used on
your own file system
but that you can move it to another
computer and it will work just fine
it is also important to not obfuscate or
muddy the structure
when computing results you shouldn't
save them to the input data for example
but into the analysis super data set
because outputs next to inputs reduce
the reusability and clarity of the input
data set
and with regards to data analysis you
should define your computational
environment as explicit provenance you
could for example
create or use container images as
portable software environments that
allow yourself
and others to redo your analysis on any
computer
luckily datalite can version control
software images just fine
and i will show you this in a minute and
finally during any step in a data
analysis
you should collect and create and store
as much provenance as you can
so that there's a digital trace of what
has been done how
why when and by whom
now let's take a concrete look into
examples of applying the uter principles
in a data analysis
you have seen that i have installed
input data as a standalone data set to
keep
my data analysis module line reusable
already
the if i go
up into my
super dataset and then call the datalet
subdatasets command
then you can see that it is now listed
as a subdivision
my super dataset has a code directory
and i will now add a script to the super
data set to perform a data analysis on
the input data that i've just installed
let me just print the contents of this
script into the terminal so that i can
echo all of this into a new script
and once this is printed i will
highlight a couple
of concepts from the yoda principles
that
i'm applying in the script
the script and the data here are a
complete toy example
it's a k-means clustering analysis in
python on the
a well-known iris data set that is used
to classify
different species of virus flowers by
their sepal and petal width and length
and you don't need to pay much attention
to the scripts or what it does but
here are a few parts where it
follows the yoda principles that i want
to highlight
so one thing that i want to show you is
that right at the start it
imports the data led python api and it
then
uses datalet get to retrieve data which
is referred to
with a relative path
[Music]
further down you can see that i am
saving
the results for one a plot
and then down here a prediction report
with a relative path for one and not
into the input data set
but into this super data set okay
if i execute this command now then i
have
a new file in my dataset
datalet status reports this file is
unchecked so let me quickly save this
addition to the data set with data let's
save
and i'm also attaching a tag to just
have another version identifier
at this history version
okay now let me show you how you can
execute the script in a way
that captures plenty of provenance in
accordance to the order principles
and first i'm going to do this in the
simplest way the command i'm using for
this is data let run
first of all i'm making sure that i have
a clean data set state
because data led run will take
any command line argument or any command
line
command let me quickly print that to the
screen so that you can see it
in this case the command that i'm giving
to it
is the execution of the script and data
run will execute this command
so if all of the resulting data set
modifications
and all of those modifications will then
be associated with the command execution
that's why you need
a clean dataset state before starting
this command
what you can see that i'm also doing
in this command invocation is that i'm
attaching a human readable commit
message
and this commit message will be under
which everything will be saved
and there are two more optional
arguments that i'm using here for one
the dash
input flag i can use this flag
any amount of times to specify paths to
data or globs or complete directories or
sub data sets
that need to be retrieved via data that
get prior to the computation
and the second one is dash dash output
and i use this
flag to denote any files that would need
to become unlocked for modification
prior to redoing the computation
this sounds a bit cryptic but it will
become clear soon
so now when i execute this datalet will
retrieve all inputs
unlock all outputs at least try execute
the command and thus the script
and then save all of the results and the
result
the result of this is not only the
results of the data analysis
but also a machine readable record in
the data set
that includes everything i have
specified as digital provenance and
attaches it to the result
it's not really readable but let me
demonstrate what's particularly cool
based on this record you can instruct
dataled to rerun this analysis
to show you this i'm cloning a published
version of this data set from github
this data set contains the exact same
analysis it's just that i've published
it
and if i now take a look inside of this
data set i can query one of the results
files of how it came to be using gitlock
and then i can use the commit identifier
that you can see here
and i can plug it into a command that is
called dataled rerun
and what data does then it re-obtains
the input data it
unlocks outputs for modification and it
will perform the exact same analysis
again
which is absolutely fantastic but
it's still not optimal so while this
works really fine on my computer
it misses a very crucial part of digital
provenance and that is software
if i wouldn't have the correct python
environment for the script
then it can fail to run or reproduce but
there is a data extension that can help
um an extension for data that is a
python package that you can install on
top of datalit
and that adds functionality to datalit
the extension that is relevant here
is datalet container and you can install
it via pip
this extension allows datalet to work
with software containers and thus
includes software environments as
digital provenance
i have already installed it and here i'm
going to demonstrate how i'm using it
so first of all i'm going back into my
own analysis data set
and now i'm using the datalet containers
at command to register
a software container into my data set um
and i can register any amount of
container images here you can see that i
am
registering a image from a
singularityhub url and i'm
saving it under the name software in my
dataset
once i have attached a software
container
you can see that it's currently
downloading it i can
not only share this software container
together with my data set to include
software as provenance
and as a part of my data analysis
but i can also include
information on the software container
into
a run command and i'm doing this
with the data led containers run command
which
works pretty similar to data that run
it's just that i'm also attaching
information on which container
image to use in this case i'm
identifying it with
the name software that i have given it
um okay so when i execute this command
now
the command is executed just as before
but
inside of the content and the container
is included
as additional provenance into my run
record
and because everything is now version
controlled and tracked
i can precisely identify any difference
that be
occur between reruns now if
a run or a re-run does not lead to any
modification in the data set there will
be no entry in the history because
there's nothing to save
so for example you can check if your
analysis yields identical results on two
different computers just by
re-running them and seeing if something
is saved and this changed
you could also do this after code
refactoring to see if everything still
works as expected
but if a change introduces a difference
between previous output and recomputed
output
then only those files with differences
are saved and then you can use git tools
to investigate
the precise difference so as an example
let me update the color scheme of the
figure from muted to blues
i'm doing this from the command line
again with the stream editor set
if i take a look at this change you can
see
i'm just changing the color palette
and now i can save this
change uh and if i
um now rerun the last run commit
um i'm identifying it here with the git
terminology
head one so the second most recent
commit
then this rerun shouldn't result in a
change of the prediction report but it
should result in a change
of the color and i can verify this by
taking a look at the history
for example i could use a git diff
between the current state
and the state before that and you will
see that the
only modified file is the pairwise
relation
png file and i can then investigate the
precise differences between those files
because
both of them exist in my history i can
check them out and then pick whichever
version i need
so to quickly summarize the reproducible
computation features
the data let run command can record the
command and its impact on a data set
whatever the command produces will be
saved so you should use it in a clean
data set everything that you specify as
input will be retrieved
prior to the command execution and
everything that's specified as output
will be unlocked for modification
if the command is rerun if you want to
capture computational environments as
provenance
you can use the data.containers
extension to add software images to your
dataset and run commands inside of them
and if you want to then redo a
computation that has been
performed with containers run or run
then you can use data rerun to
automatically re-execute commands later
based on the provenance that you have
collected
now before the session ends i have one
last thing to highlight
you've seen that dataled makes data
retrieval
fantastically easy and let me assure you
that you can get plenty of data as data
data sets for example
all open neurodata or the human
connectom project data set
at the time that i'm recording this
lecture retrieving abcd data is not yet
possible with dataled
what is difficult for us is that the
abcd dataset contains
file names with gyds and those file
names cannot be shared publicly which
makes it difficult
the good news however is that it is in
principle possible
and there's a chance that by the time
you're viewing this lecture there is an
abcd
data led data set available that you can
clone if you authenticate with nda
credentials that have appropriate access
my colleague yaric whom you will be next
week has already transformed the abcd
data
into a large nested data led data set
and i will use the last few minutes of
my lecture to show you
the looks and feels of this data set
just so that you have an idea
let me um clone this data set and for
this i'm going outside
of my analysis data set
first of all i'm cloning the data set
note that i'm cloning it from a private
web server here this web server
is a web server where only few people
have access to
if there is an abcd data data set by the
time you see this lecture
you will get a new a url that you can
replace the url that you're seeing here
with
um let me download this
data or let me install this data set now
you can see again that it is
really really fast but this data set is
obviously super large
and because it's so large it is split
into a hierarchy of nested data sets
here's a schematic overview of how this
looks like so there's one super data set
the one that i've just cloned and this
super data set contains one sub data set
per participant and each participant
can also contain additional sub data
sets and this splits the vast amount of
files in the abcd data between thousands
of data sets now here is how this data
set looks and feels like
after cloning the data set contains
about
10 000 subject directories but it is
super small in size
each of the directories that you can see
here
is a sub data set so if i execute data
let's update the sets
then that command will get really busy
um now
each of these directories looks
like a directory but
because it's a sub data set that has
only
come with the super data set but hasn't
been
installed yet these directories appear
to be
empty in order to browse the files
that how you've been used to and how
you've seen it in the study forest data
set
you need to install it and the data let
get command can do this for you
if you want to only install a data set
but not download any data then you can
attach the dash dash no data or short
dash
n flag and that will only install the
data set so that you can browse the
files and then retrieve data on demand
if you would want to install all of the
sub data sets you can run data let get
with the
recursive flag from the top level data
set
but note that this would take a while
but it's possible and
enabled by those recursive operations
that i've mentioned
one thing that you need to be aware of
is that you need to do a small detour if
you want to retrieve data from sub data
sets that
aren't yet installed let me quickly show
you how to
retrieve data from an installed sub data
set
here i'm just retrieving
the data from this one subject
and that works just fine
but back at the start of the session
with study forest data set
i had used an asterisk character to
to let my shell expand this character to
match patterns and that allowed me to
get a bunch of files at once
if i would try this like this
in order to get several um
data subjects uh data so i'm i'm
expanding over
um over subject identifiers here
then this will not work if the sub-data
sets
are not installed because in this case
where there are no file paths available
due to the subdata sets being not
installed the shell can't expand to any
of that
so what i need to do is i either need to
install
all of these sub data sets first or i
can get creative
and i can explore the capabilities of
your shell so you've already heard how
powerful
a tool your shell is and here is an
example on how
i can flexibly use the capabilities of
my shell to overcome
the limitation with expansion so
the first thing that i'm doing here is a
bash for loop
and this batch for loop loops over all
subject directories
and then based on the directory names it
constructs paths
to the files that i want to retrieve for
all of the subjects
and i'm writing this into a simple text
file via redirection
and what i can then do is i can
pipe the contents of this file into a
data like get call
for this i'm using the unix x args
command
which allows me to pass what is
happening on the left of the pipe
all of the file names as an argument
into what comes after the x arcs command
data let get and xox even lets me
parallelize this with the
n argument so that retrieval of many
files are sped up and here i'm
parallelizing 20 full that means i'm
running 20 parallel get cause at once
there are more um tips and gists
like this in the detailed handbook and
if you follow the url up there
you can read all about them so
as we are at the end of the session
here's a quick summary
datalite has a lot of features if you
use dataled
then you can version control any file
easily you can create
share and use digital provenance of your
data analysis
and you can even have a machine redo
previous analysis
and verify the purchasability of your
results
you can consume large amounts of data
easily maybe hopefully even the abcd
dataset
and you can make sure to be transparent
and clear
in your work but even though this
session has been intense
there's a lot that i haven't talked
about or demonstrate luckily
it is all written up and if you want to
learn more about dataled
then you can there is extensive user
documentation in the
handbook there are recordings of
tutorials and workshops on our youtube
channel
and there is a matrix channel where you
can interact with other users and the
datalet developers
and with that i want to thank you for
your attention i'm looking forward to
the qa session
and i'm looking forward to seeing you
virtually
take care stay healthy and bye bye